.\" $Id: tcal.1 v0.06 1997/01/02 00:00:06 tom Exp $
.\"
.\" tcal.1:  English [n]roff source of TCAL manual page
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1996, 1997 Thomas Esken
.\"
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
.\" this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
.\" are preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
.\" resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
.\" notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
.\" into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
.\" except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
.\" by the Free Software Foundation.
.\"
.\"
.\" ------------------------oOO      \\\_''/      OOo---------------------------
.\" Thomas Esken               O     (/o-o\)     O  eMail: esken@uni-muenster.de
.\" Im Hagenfeld 84                 ((  ^  ))       Phone: +49 251 232585
.\" D-48147 Muenster; Germany    \____) ~ (____/    MotD : 2old2live, 2young2die
.\"
.\"
.de EX \"Begin example
.ne 5
.if n .sp 1
.if t .sp .5
.nf
.in +5n
..
.de EE \"End example
.fi
.in -5n
.if n .sp 1
.if t .sp .5
..
.\" Page parameters
.ll 6.5i
.pl 11i
.po 0
.\"
.TH TCAL 1 "January 02, 1997"
.SH NAME
tcal \- runs the Gcal program with the date of tomorrow's day.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tcal
[
.I \-\-help
|
.I \-\-version
] | [
.I \-\-shift=[+|\-]number
] [
.B Argument\&...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Tcal
is a program which runs
.B gcal
with a date set one day ahead (equivalent the
.I \-\-shift=1
option). All given
.B arguments
are passed unmodified to the Gcal program. If the Gcal program
shall be called with another date than tomorrow's date, this desired
date can be selected by using the
.I \-\-shift=[+|\-]number
option, in which
.I [+|\-]number
is the distance of days the desired date is distant from the actual
date (works only for Gregorian years). The
.I \-\-shift
option must be given before all other
.B arguments
which are passed to the Gcal program. An exit status of 0 means all
processing is successfully done, any other value means an error has occured.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I \-\-help
Print a usage message listing all available options, then exit
successfully.
.TP
.I \-\-version
Print the version number, then exit successfully.
.TP
.I \-\-shift=[+|\-]number
Define the displacement in
.I [+|\-]number
days the desired date is distant from the actual date.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
GCALPROG
The
.I GCALPROG
environment variable contains the file name of the
executable Gcal program, which is used by
.B tcal
to call Gcal. Takes precedence over the file name
.B gcal,
which is burned\-in during the compilation step of
.B tcal.
.bp
.SH COPYRIGHT
.in 0
.sp
.B Tcal
Copyright (C) 1995, 1996, 1997 Thomas Esken
.LP
This software doesn't claim completeness, correctness or usability.
On principle I will not be liable for any damages or losses (implicit
or explicit), which result from using or handling my software.
If you use this software, you agree without any exception to this
agreement, which binds you
.I LEGALLY !!
.sp
.B Tcal
is free software and distributed under the terms of the `GNU General
Public License'; published by the `Free Software Foundation'; version 2 or
(at your option) any later version.
.sp
Any suggestions, improvements, extensions, bug reports, donations, proposals
for contract work, and so forth are welcome!  If you like this tool, I'd
appreciate a
.I postcard
from you!
.sp
Enjoy it   =8^)
.SH AUTHOR
.in 2
.nf
------------------------oOO      \e\e\e_''/      OOo---------------------------
Thomas Esken               O     (/o-o\e)     O  eMail: esken@uni-muenster.de
Im Hagenfeld 84                 ((  ^  ))       Phone: +49 251 232585
D-48147 Muenster; Germany    \e____) ~ (____/    MotD : 2old2live, 2young2die
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
gcal(1),
txt2gcal(1),
gcal2txt(1)
